Ask her to do the same thing for me, but now we are recording so I can take it away.

All right, thanks. There's quite a build up. I hope I live up to it. I guys, I you may have met me before. You may not have. I'm the director and school of it have been here for about a year.

My background is I asked my Ph.D. and I guess I came here from Kennesaw State where I was the department head for those at University of Oklahoma for 15 years. And there is department. One of my areas of research specialization is how to use technology to support teams.

And so as we have dealt with the pandemic, I volunteer for anybody who wanted me to come in and talk a little bit about how to manage a team project in the environment that you're in now where you can't meet and you need to figure out how to work together using technology, which you probably have been doing for years, because you technology and then have been ubiquitous your whole lives. But you may or may not have been doing it right. And so if we're going to ask you to do a team project, we're going ask you to do a team project that you can't just meet face to face and figure it out, then the least we can do is provide you with a little bit of content about how to be high performing teams and what some of those right selections are for the technologies that are available to you for collaboration. So that's of the context of me being here today. So I do have I'm going to go ahead and share my screen. I do have a set of slides and I apologize.

I'm not a huge fan of death by PowerPoint, but it's the best way for me to make sure I hit the necessary points and for you to have some set of notes that you can take away with you. So that's what I've done. All right, so just to to start out, you might have wondered over time why in the world do we have to do team projects in our classes? I bet it's because professors want to have less stuff to grade. Anybody think that's why we do it?

There might be a little truth in that, right, but in addition to that, teams can outperform individuals. They may use employee talents better, they can be more flexible and responsive to the environment. They can facilitate involvement. They can democratize. And you noticed I put some tentative language around it. Teams don't actually outperform individuals unless they're put together in a way that works. Otherwise, you expend all of your effort and and exercise in trying to herd those cats that are in your team and you don't get enough time to work on the task. So in order for teams that perform individuals, we have to manage that. Cost coordination teams can use employee talents better, but only if the right talents have been put together on a team. And there is a distinction that can be made in the literature about groups versus teams.

Groups tend to be a set of people that have the same skill set and we're taking a big task or each taking a chunk of the same task and just getting it done in parallel teams. Generally, the teams generally means that the people that have been put together have varied skill sets. And if we spend some time understanding what each of us are good at and why we might have put in put together on this team and then leveraging those different talents, then the team is going to use employee talents better. We don't bother getting to know each other. No one would. Each of our talents are probably not using them any better than if you'd worked individually. We can be more flexible, responsive to changes in the environment, just as there are more people we can potentially multiply our flexibility. This is especially true when you think about teams that you may have had experience with in a summer internship that are locally located around the globe. So you may have certainly if you haven't as IT professionals, you will have cases where you're working on a team where some people are in India, some people are in Malaysia, some people are in Australia, some people are in Europe. And the point of that is this notion of a follow the Sun team where the team is always on, there's always some member of the team that's up and at work, and that really provides a great deal of responsiveness to the environment.

If we have more people involved and they're actually involved, right. Then we're getting more employee input and and collaboration and things that the organization wants to have happen, which can, as the final item says, democratize, increase motivation. People feel heard. They feel like they're contributing. So those are the arguments that get made often about team processes. So one of the reasons that we do team projects and classes is to mimic the real world environment. We know that when you leave here, you're not going to be working as an individual most of the time you going to be working as part of a group or a team. And so helping you develop some sense of what it means to be a part of a team and how to be effective in a team is valuable. And I will tell you what's not effective. And and I'll be honest with you, when I was a student, I was this person, the the the individuals that decide I can't trust everybody else to be responsible for some part of my grade. So I'm just going to do everything myself. And I may I may just let everybody get credit even though I didn't let them do anything, or I may excoriate them in the evaluation at the end. But the reality is, when you leave here and you go to work, you can't do it all yourself and you won't be allowed to do somebody else's job because you don't trust them to do it right. So this is a pretty safe environment to go to learn how to figure out what other people do, how to work with them in a way that can develop trust. So you can allow them to have some part of the responsibility for something that's going to contribute to your grade in real life. It's going to contribute to your performance evaluation, your ability to be successful in that organization. So that will be my my pitch to you about why would you team projects so fine? We're going to do a team project. Our teams always better do they always produce better results? And the answer is no. Not all problems are solved by adding manpower. Team has to figure out how to be effective. And so the first thing that can happen in a team that can harm its effectiveness is something that gets called social loafing in the academic literature. And you may not have heard the phrase social loafing before, but you've probably experienced it. And the notion is that when I work in part as part of a group where the output, where the product, there's no clarity about who produced what part of it. So my individual contribution cannot be discerned when that environment takes place. I as an individual, as a human being, and likely to put less effort in than I would if my individual effort could be identified and treated separately. So what I work on my own homework and the only person who's contributing to me getting a good grade is me. I put in more effort than I'm working on a team project and they're supposed to be two or three other. While also contributing, I might put in less effort to as a natural human response and so have the experience that.

I can assume everybody's shaking their head, yes.

There's a lot of effort that says that's in fact what happens when we work on teams. We only have so many hours in the day. We have lots of things we're trying to accomplish and we may shortchange our team on occasion in order to get our individual work done.

Now I'm just playing around, OK? The other thing that can cause problems in a team that can impact how the individual effort accumulates into the group effort is something called the ringland effect. Now, I could tell you exactly what this is without ever saying Riggleman effect, but I've decided it's my duty as a as a faculty member to produce dozens and dozens and dozens of students who go out into real life and toss casually into conversation. Oh, that's the ringland effect. It just make me super happy if that happened. So start to think about what you can toss out in the conversation. So this is documented in the 40s or 50s. It's a really old thing. And it says people become less productive when they work with others. But it's not social loafing is a different thing and it's a loss of efficiency as the group size increases. That's a result of coordination. And what Riggleman looked at was teams of war. And so I looked at the amount of force that any individual could put on the rope and then he met and then he measured the total force of a team playing tug of war. And what he discovered was the total force of the team was less than if you total the force that any individual could put on the rope. And any guesses why that would be?

I assumed that since there was more of them, they didn't have to try as hard themselves.

So that would be a social thing and that is one explanation. But he produced a second one. You have thoughts about what a second one might be.

When people have to coordinate, they there will be some effort that's lost in the act of coordinating itself, right.

And that's exactly what the Riggleman effect is. So you think about it from a tug of war perspective. It has to do with the angle that you're pulling at. Right. There's some loss in force because we're not pulling in exactly the same direction. So if you're taller, if you're not sort of lined up right or your shoulder, there's some loss, something called a process loss associated with the with the rope not being straight anymore. Right. And so you guys aren't pulling a rope, but the concept still matters. We have to say, hey, are you doing your part? Wait, what was I supposed to do? Oh, this doesn't fit with what you're right. It's that cost of coordination that isn't people putting in less effort. It is the fact that I have to put in slightly more effort. And that effort is coordination. So the two things that you have to manage as part of your team, whether it's face to face or or computer mediated, is how are we going to address social loafing and then how are we going to manage coordination cost?

Which takes us to kind of the final topic in these slides, and that is that you guys have don't have the options that you would normally where you could be at the same time, same place or traditional team that just says every day after class, we're going to meet for 20 minutes. We're going to check in now. We're going to go do our jobs instead. You could be you're more likely going to be a different place same time, which is what we are right now. Right. When you're zooming, you're in different places, but you're meeting synchronously or same story, different place, different time, which is the notion of asynchronous. And that would be what we do when we're emailing or when we're using some sort of file sharing a shared folder to to look at each other's documents and work together on a Google doc or something. You're probably not going to experience same same place, different time, which is sort of like job sharing where somebody works in the office for me to do. They sort of leave a list of things that still need to be done and somebody comes in to the office from one to five and sort of picks up the slack. So what you guys are going to experience in your teams and you're going to want to manage is the synchronous versus asynchronous way that you're going to interact with each other. And both of those, if you're not going to be in the same place at the same time, make you what gets referred to as a virtual team or computer mediated team, and it just means that technology is bringing together in some way. In fact, probably every team you've ever worked on in your adult life was virtual or computer computer mediated in some way. Even if you met some stuff in the interim that you were doing over email or SharePoint or me or any other technology that supported your team. But the thing to think about as you as you use technology to support your team is there are some things, especially in asynchronous technology, that have to be carefully managed.

So the notion, the notion of absence of pure verbal and nonverbal cues when we're on Zoom, if you all had your cameras on, we would we would have more of the power of verbal and nonverbal, because I could see your body language.

I could see if you were shaking your head or not, if you're staring off into space when to stop talking. Right. All of those would be nonverbal cues and an email, for instance. You don't get any of those. That's where, by the way, emojis were invented to try to add some of the verbal back to email communication for anybody who wondered why we have them. So we have to think about when we're emailing that people can infer tone, they can assume that you're trying to accomplish something. And so we can engage, we can have some miscommunication or somebody read a tone in your email that wasn't intended and then get mad. And that's sort of the same as this notion of a limited social context. But part of that is you just don't develop that sense of friendship over email, right. That you would sit together in class or chat about things after class. But the upside is you can overcome time and space constraints. So some members of your team or morning people and you think you do your best work between midnight and three a.m. doesn't matter because everybody can work when it's most convenient for them. And that, again, sort of gets at this ball of the sun, almost idea that the team could potentially be working non-stop. Twenty four hours a day. People preferred to work at different times of the day. I'm not advocating that any of you guys need to be twenty four hour teams or suggesting that in order to accomplish your project, you have to do that. All right, so what does it mean to you, you have a semester long project, you probably want to be in a team where everyone contributes. So there's a sort of exclusivity about your team. Everybody contributes and they feel like their contribution is valued because, by the way, somebody contributes and you're not good enough for me. I'm doing it myself. You just invited them to become a social loafer because they put the effort in and you negated it. You summarily dismissed treated is of not of no value. And so you created a situation now where somebody is going to work on their own stuff because their team doesn't appreciate them. So I want exclusivity.

We want everybody to contribute and probably get a decent grade and decent might mean different things to different people in the class. I went by the way, I encourage you. Have the team's been formed already? Both.

Not yet, as you as you make your teammates, one of my first conversations will be, what grade are you looking to get? Because you can find out later and in ways that have led to miscommunication that you're all about in the day. But two of your teammates are like these, fine with me and I'm going to put B level effort in. And so coming to some shared understanding of the level of effort everybody wants can avoid some miscommunications later on. All right, so here is my advice to you, Will, I'm going to ask you to pop in with what they're required to do as I cover it. So how do we get to a team that manages social loafing, that addresses the cost of coordination, that gets to exclusivity and the outcomes that they want and a fairly enjoyable experience?

I would tell you that one step number one is to actually discuss and potentially even write down a team contract. And what the team contract does is before anybody's emotions get involved, before there's any conflict, is you have a rational conversation that is here or my expectations from my teammates. And if your expectations of mine are different, we can try to find some resolution to that. But even if we never resolve it, it's much easier to deal with when it doesn't surprise you 15 seconds before deadline. Right. You know what? Up front managed for it. So what kinds of expectations might you discuss? When do assignments need to be completed? All right. Does this team want things done a couple of days early so everybody can look at it? Are we perfectly content to have things done right at the deadline? I will tell you just my own free advice. Nobody does their best work at the last minute. Take that and do what you want do with it. But if we say this team is always going to we're going to each have our own individual assignments for this task and everybody needs to have their done twenty four hours in advance so we can make sure things work together so we can look at each other's work and we can turn in the best product possible. Potentially we avoid social loafing because we've indicated this is do a day in advance so we don't come to the first deadline and go, how can you have your stuff? And your teammates would not do for 30 more minutes. Why you? Well, we never had that conversation. So you didn't know that their expectations were different from yours. The second one is how we respond to electronic communication. So if we're zooming, that's easy, right? It's synchronous. But what about when it's asynchronous? Your team should decide. Does every email get responded to within eight hours, within twenty four hours, whatever it is. And the reason that's important is there's lots of research out there that says when we don't see each other, an email or some form of electronic communication is our primary means of interacting with our team. When I send a message and it takes you, what, a day, two days to get back to me, I don't assume you're working hard on it. I assume that your social loafing and not paying enough attention to the team. And so even if it's used in a no go, hey, where are you going, have it done and I go, I got your message, it'll be done tomorrow as opposed to me not responding and having it done tomorrow. Those are very different outcomes in terms of how the team forms and how effective we work together. So having a shared understanding of how we respond to communication and that includes maybe I think everybody should respond within 15 seconds because I'm constantly monitoring social media, but other people don't write. They might need to say to me, what is great that you're going to respond in a minute. But our norm is going to be four hours, eight hours, two hours, whatever it is, but agreed to it and then think really hard about how you handle conflict and conflict often starts as just a difference of opinion about how something must be done. We have a task to do, I think we should do. And somebody else thinks we should do. We and and how does the group discuss it? How do we evaluate alternatives versus now? I said I don't care what your opinion is. Well, that went from a simple difference of opinion. Now to an emotional conflict where I've decided I don't like you. By the way, when I stop liking you, I'm back to social loafing. All right. So figuring out when there's a difference of opinion, how does it get handled? We just do a vote. Do we go to the professor? Do we go to a neutral third party? Do we have a formal leader during each phase development? And the leader is always the the decider, just something that tries to take the emotion out of it. Because conflict in a team is good. It means that you're exploring lots of the of the solutions based on you're looking for really good, solid solutions. But when conflict isn't handled right, that good TASC conflict escalates into really bad social conflict and team members stop liking each other.

And that interpersonal conflict leads to social loafing probably more than anything else.

Must stop and see if you have questions at.

Well, do you want to do that? Do they need to do a team contract?

Yes, they do, and it will be available on Reginette before the next class, before Wednesday, so they'll be able to get started on this pretty much right away, not in your template or something, right? Yes, they will be supplied with a template on Reginette. And I just want to remind you guys, though, for this for this team contract, you're required to communicate only through the Reginette forums. So I'll remind you guys will be reminded of that throughout this first process, his first assignment. But then after that, you guys are going to be free. You're going to be wild and free to meet in any way that you want to zoom whatever other community computer mediated communication to you would like to use it for this first team contract. Reginette forms only.

All right. I'm going to get back. I'm asking for a second to get back.

So the reason that we're doing this and asking you just is a asynchronous medium to do this is there's lots of research about teams that says if we meet face to face or via zoom or something right off the bat, there are some biases that can form that are related to just how we might look different or act different on the surface and that teams can be higher performing, especially computer media teams could be higher performing faster by sharing some ideas. First, you form opinions about the ideas before you form opinions about the individual. So that is us just asking you to experiment, to experience that and see if you find yourself reacting similarly, that you're reacting to the ideas and not to the individual. And then again, after the first challenge the team project, you'll you'll decide to use some common combination of asynchronous and synchronous that I'll come back to this and talk about when the first I'm going to give you step two for being a high performing, inclusive team, and that is to rotate roles. Your team should assign roles so everybody knows what's expected of them for any deliverables. And some of those roles can be task leadership, which is producer monitoring of broker, facilitator, etc.. So this leader reflects that was developed before many of your board has been sighted a lot of times is that any leader in a team rotates through all eight of these roles, different points in time in a team project. And how they do and when they do can impact within. The team is higher performing or lower performing. And my own work on student teams using technology to interact on a semester project so that as you guys found, that the highest performing teams exhibited individual producer behavior, individual task leadership, which meant everybody to be responsible for those things that were assigned to them and getting it done. And then shared monitoring means everybody is keeping an eye on what everybody else on the team is supposed to be producing, see if they need help, checking in with them, looking at a product before it gets submitted. So we are all quality control and everybody individually needs to make sure that their part is done well.

So the producer sorry, I, I. Oh, sorry, no. These are the rules we're asking you to define in your team a team lead in each phase, so the leader clearly communicates, assign tasks and evaluates individual performance.

So somebody needs to decide who's doing what or else. Three people are all doing one thing and nobody's doing anything else. Right. So somebody needs to say, OK, we're going to do this part. You're going to do that. Somebody should be a monitor. All those helpful if everybody monitors. But what a monitor is doing is they're looking at messages and files, looking for missing pieces, for specific, specific deliverable, letting people know if something they've posted can't be open, can be read, whatever that problem might be. A broker brokers look for bringing things in from Xtranormal to the group to improve the group deliverables. So.